>> Stewart: ON THIS EDITION FOR
SATURDAY, MAY 20:
WITH CONTROVERSY BREWING AT
HOME, PRESIDENT TRUMP IS IN
SAUDI ARABIA, ON HIS FIRST TRIP
ABROAD AS COMMANDER-IN-CHIEF.
IRAN RE-ELECTS ITS PRESIDENT,
WHO PUSHED THE NUCLEAR DEAL WITH
THE U.S. AND OTHER NATIONS.
AND, IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT:
THE CHALLENGES OF WIRING AN
ENTIRE AFRICAN COUNTRY FOR
ELECTRICITY.
NEXT, ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS AT
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
ALISON STEWART.
>> Stewart: GOOD EVENING, AND
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
ON HIS FIRST TRIP ABROAD AS
PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES,
DONALD TRUMP RECEIVED A ROYAL
WELCOME IN SAUDI ARABIA TODAY.
THE PRESIDENT AND FIRST LADY,
MELANIA TRUMP, WERE GREETED BY
SAUDI KING SALMAN AFTER THEY
ARRIVED ON "AIR FORCE ONE" IN
THE SAUDI CAPITAL OF RIYADH.
TOPPING THE OFFICIAL AGENDA,
SAUDI AGREEMENTS TO PURCHASE
$110 BILLION OF AMERICAN-MADE
MILITARY EQUIPMENT AND WEAPONS,
AND TO SPEND A TOTAL OF $350
BILLION ON ARMS AND OTHER GOODS
OVER TEN YEARS.
MR. TRUMP DESCRIBED THE DEAL AS
"TREMENDOUS INVESTMENTS IN THE
UNITED STATES."
>> HUNDREDS OF BILLIONS OF
DOLLARS OF INVESTMENTS INTO THE
UNITED STATES, AND JOBS, JOBS,
JOBS."
>> Stewart: U.S. SECRETARY OF
STATE REX TILLERSON SAID THE
ARMS DEAL WILL BOLSTER JOINT
EFFORTS TO DETER REGIONAL
THREATS FROM IRAN, AND TO COMBAT
ISLAMIC EXTREMIST GROUPS IN
SYRIA AND YEMEN.
>> THIS HUGE ARMS SALES PACKAGE
REDUCES THE BURDEN ON THE UNITED
STATES TO PROVIDE THE SAME
EQUIPMENT TO OUR OWN MILITARY
FORCES AND WILL STRENGTHEN
SAUDI SECURITY FORCES FOR THE
FUTURE SO THAT SAUDI ARABIA IS
MORE CAPABLE OF CARRYING A
GREATER SHARE OF THE BURDEN OF
THEIR OWN SECURITY.
WHICH, AS I INDICATED, IS
IMPORTANT TO THE U.S. NATIONAL
SECURITY, AS WELL.
>> TODAY WAS A TRULY HISTORIC
DAY IN THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN
THE KINGDOM OF SAUDI ARABIA AND
THE UNITED STATES, AND WE
BELIEVE THE BEGINNING OF A
TURNING POINT IN THE
RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THE UNITED
STATES AND THE ARAB AND
ISLAMIC WORLD.
>> Stewart: TOMORROW, THE
PRESIDENT WILL DELIVER A SPEECH
BEFORE A MEETING OF MORE THAN 50
ARAB AND MUSLIM LEADERS.
AFTER TWO DAYS IN SAUDI ARABIA,
MR. TRUMP WILL VISIT ISRAEL,
MEET NATO ALLIES IN BELGIUM AND
LEADERS OF INDUSTRIAL
DEMOCRACIES IN ITALY, WHERE
HE'LL ALSO HAVE AN AUDIENCE WITH
POPE FRANCIS.
THE FOREIGN TRIP COMES AMID THE
EXPANSION OF DOMESTIC
INVESTIGATIONS OF RUSSIAN
INTERFERENCE IN THE U.S.
PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION LAST YEAR,
AS WELL AS THE WHITE HOUSE'S
HANDLING OF THE PROBE.
IN ADDITION TO THIS WEEK'S
APPOINTMENT OF AN INDEPENDENT
COUNSEL, LAST NIGHT, FORMER
F.B.I. DIRECTOR JAMES COMEY, WHO
WAS FIRED BY MR. TRUMP, AGREED
TO TESTIFY IN PUBLIC BEFORE THE
SENATE INTELLIGENCE COMMITTEE
AFTER MEMORIAL DAY.
"NEW YORK TIMES" CORRESPONDENT
BEN HUBBARD IS IN RIYADH,
COVERING THE VISIT AND JOINS ME
NOW VIA SKYPE.
BEN, THIS TRIP HAS BEEN BILLED
AS AN OPPORTUNITY TO RESET THE
AMERICAN-SAUDI RELATIONSHIP.
WHAT NEEDS RESETTING?
>> WELL, I THINK FROM THE SAUDI
PERSPECTIVE, THERE'S A LOT OF
THINGS THAT NEED RESETTING.
THE SAUDIS, WHICH HAVE BEEN
AMERICAN ALLIES IN THE MIDDLE
EAST FOR MANY, MANY DECADES,
FELT-- WE CAN SAY THEY FELT VERY
DECEIVED UNDER PRESIDENT OBAMA.
THERE WAS ANGER OVER THE WAY
OBAMA SEEMED TO GIVE UP ON
HOSTING MUBARAK AND OTHER
ARAB ALLIES DURING THE ARAB
SPRING PROTESTS.
THEY WERE VERY ANGRY AT HIS
HESITANCY TO GET MORE INVOLVED
IN THE WAR ON SYRIA.
AND THE IRAN DEAL WAS A HUGE
BLOW TO THEM.
THEY VERY MUCH FELT THAT THIS
PRESIDENT, WHO WAS SUPPOSED TO
BE ONE OF OUR GREAT ALLIES WENT
BEHIND OUR BACK AND MADE THIS
DEAL WITH ONE OF OUR ENEMIES.
AFTER TRUMP WAS ELECTED, THERE
IS VERY MUCH A SENSE HERE THAT
THIS IS A GUY WHO UNDERSTANDS
US.
THIS IS A GUY WE CAN DO BUSINESS
WITH.
THIS IS SOMEBODY THAT HAS, YOU
KNOW, SAID ALL THE RIGHT THINGS
WHEN IT COMES TO THINGS WE CARE
ABOUT, WHICH ARE FIGHTING
TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS AND
SPECIFICALLY WITH CONFRONTING
IRAN.
>> Stewart: BEN, LET'S TALK A
LITTLE MORE ABOUT BUSINESS.
CAN YOU TELL ME ABOUT THAT $110
BILLION WEAPONS DEAL THAT WAS
STRUCK TODAY?
>> AND IT COULD END UP BEING
$350 BILLION OVER THE NEXT TEN
YEARS.
THEY'RE GOING TO BUILD HIGH-TECH
HELICOPTERS HERE IN THE KINGDOM,
AND DEALS THAT ARE EXPECTED TO
COME THROUGH TOMORROW DEALING
WITH OIL AND TECHNOLOGIES AND
VARIOUS OTHER INDUSTRIES.
>> Stewart: HAS THERE BEEN ANY
REACTION TO MR. TRUMP'S
STATEMENTS THAT OFFENDED SO MANY
MUSLIMS?
>> I SPENT TIME OUTSIDE THE AREA
OF WHERE ALL THE OFFICIALS ARE.
YESTERDAY, I WENT TO A HARLEY
DAVIDSON RALLY, ACTUALLY, AND
MET ALL THESE SAUDIS WHO LOVE
HARLEY DAVIDSONS.
AND IT WAS AMAZING HOW MANY
SAUDIS TELL YOU HOW MUCH THEY
LIKE TRUMP, THIS IS A GUY WE CAN
UNDERSTAND.
YOU TRY TO PUSH THEM-- WHAT
ABOUT ALL THE THINGS HE SAID
ABOUT ISLAM AND YOUR COUNTRY?
THEY SEEM A LOT MORE WILLING, I
THINK THAN MANY AMERICANS TO
DISMISS IT AS CAMPAIGN RHETORIC.
THERE HAS BEEN A CONCERTED MEDIA
CAMPAIGN INSIDE THE KINGDOM AND
I THINK IT TRICKLED DOWN AND
PEOPLE FELT OKAY THIS IS GOING
TO BE A GUY WE CAN DO BUSINESS
WITH.
>> Stewart: BEN, MR. TRUMP IS
SLATED TO GIVE A SPEECH
TOMORROW.
IS THERE ANY INDICATION WITH THE
TONE, THE TENOR, THE CONTENT?
>> NO, AND IT'S INTERESTING.
THIS IS THE ONE THING THAT A
NUMBER OF SAUDI CONTACTS I HAVE,
HAVE EXPRESSED SOME DISCOMFORT
OVER.
THEY'VE KIND OF SAID, HMMM,
TRUMP IS GOING TO GIVE A SPEECH
ABOUT ISLAM.
HMMM, WE NEED TO SEE HOW THIS IS
GOING TO GO.
I WOULDN'T SAY PEOPLE ARE TOO
SCARED OF IT BUT IT'S ONE THING
PEOPLE HAVE KIND OF-- IT'S
RAISED A LOT OF EYEBROWS, WE CAN
SAY.
WHAT REALLY INTERESTS HIM IN
THIS RELATIONSHIP IS FIGHTING
EXTREMISM.
THE SAUDIS HAVE BEEN UNDER
THREAT FROM THE ISLAMIC STATE
AND THE ISLAMIC STATE HAS
CARRIED OUT A NUMBER OF ATTACKS
INSIDE THE KINGDOM, DEADLY
ATTACKS.
AND I THINK THIS IS ANOTHER AREA
WHERE THEY THINK THEY CAN DO
BUSINESS WITH TRUMP.
>> Stewart: BEN HUBBARD OF THE
"NEW YORK TIMES" FROM RIYADH,
THANKS SO MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Stewart: SHARING THE ARABIAN
PENINSULA IS THE SMALL NATION OF
YEMEN, WHERE THOUSANDS OF
DEMONSTRATORS TODAY TOOK TO THE
STREETS OF THE CAPITAL, SANAA,
TO PROTEST PRESIDENT TRUMP'S
VISIT TO THE SAUDI KINGDOM.
THIS CAME A DAY AFTER REBEL
HOUTHI FIGHTERS, OPPOSED TO THE
SAUDI-BACKED YEMENI GOVERNMENT,
FIRED A BALLISTIC MISSILE TOWARD
RIYADH.
THE SAUDIS INTERCEPTED IT 125
MILES WEST OF THE CITY.
FOR MORE ON THE SITUATION,
MARTIN SMITH, FROM THE PBS
SERIES "FRONTLINE," JOINS ME VIA
SKYPE FROM SANNA.
MARTIN, YOU WERE AT THE PROTESTS
TODAY.
WHAT DID YOU SEE?
>> YEAH, WELL, I SAW THAT PEOPLE
HAD COME OUT TO PROTEST TRUMP'S
ARRIVAL, PRESIDENT TRUMP'S
ARRIVAL IN RIYADH, THE SAUDI
CAPITAL.
I DON'T KNOW HOW TO ESTIMATE
CROWD SIZE, BUT IT WAS CERTAINLY
LARGE.
AND THEY WERE THERE WITH
POSTERS, HOUTHI SLOGANS, YOU
KNOW-- "DOWN WITH AMERICA.
DOWN WITH ISRAEL.
GOD CURSE THE JEWS.
VICTORY TO ISLAM."
THERE WERE A SERIES OF SPEAKERS
THAT LED CHANTS OF ANTI-AMERICAN
CHANTS, ANTI-SAUDI CHANTS.
AND THEY'RE PARTICULARLY UPSET
THAT PRESIDENT TRUMP ARRIVED IN
RIYADH TO SIGN A $110 BILLION
ARMS DEAL.
THESE ARMS GO TO THE SAUDIS, AND
THEY WILL USE THESE ARMS IN
THEIR WAR IN YEMEN.
AND THE COUNTRY'S BEEN THROUGH
TWO YEARS OF WAR, AND THE PEOPLE
FEEL BROKEN.
>> Stewart: AND AS A RESULT OF
THOSE TWO YEARS OF WAR, THERE'S
A HUMANITARIAN CRISIS THERE.
WHAT YOU CAN TELL US ABOUT THAT?
>> THERE IS.
THERE ARE SEVERAL.
THERE'S A FOOD SHORTAGE.
WELL, THE W.H.O., THE WORLD
HEALTH ORGANIZATION, ESTIMATES
THAT THE CHOLERA EPIDEMIC ITSELF
WILL PROBABLY INFECT SOME
200,000 TO 300,000 YEMENIS.
RIGHT NOW THE COUNT IS ABOUT
14,000 AND ABOUT 200 TO 300
PEOPLE HAVE DIED.
UNICEF ESTIMATES 70% OF ALL
YEMENIS ARE IN NEED OF SOME KIND
OF HUMANITARIAN ASSISTANCE.
19 MILLION, I THINK, THE NUMBER
IS OF PEOPLE IN NEED OF FOOD.
YOU'VE GOT AN EXTREMELY SERIOUS
SITUATION IN WHICH THE COUNTRY
IS CLOSE TO TIPPING INTO FAMINE.
>> Stewart: I WANT TO ASK ONE
FOLLOW-UP QUESTION ABOUT THE
PROTESTS.
WERE THEY PEACEFUL?
WERE THE PROTESTERS AGITATED?
WHAT WAS THE MOOD THERE?
>> WE DIDN'T SENSE HOSTILITY
PERSONALLY.
I MEAN, THEY ALWAYS MAKE THE
DISTINCTION HERE THAT THEY
DISLIKE THE GOVERNMENT OF THE
UNITED STATES AND THAT APPLIES
TO BOTH PRESIDENT TRUMP AND
PRESIDENT OBAMA BEFORE HIM.
BUT THAT THE PEOPLE OF THE
UNITED STATES ARE NOT THEIR
ENEMY.
>> Stewart: MARTIN SMITH
REPORTING FROM SANAA, THANK YOU
SO MUCH.
>> THANK YOU, ALISON.
>> Stewart: IRANIAN PRESIDENT
HASSAN ROUHANI HAS BEEN EASILY
RE-ELECTED TO A SECOND FOUR-
YEAR-TERM, CAPTURING 57% OF THE
VOTE IN A MULTI-CANDIDATE FIELD.
VOTING HOURS WERE EXTENDED
YESTERDAY TO ACCOMMODATE LONG
LINES.
70% OF ELIGIBLE VOTERS TURNED
OUT.
THE 68-YEAR-OLD ROUHANI IS
CONSIDERED A MODERATE, WHO
SOUGHT THE NUCLEAR DISARMAMENT
AND SANCTION-LIFTING DEAL WITH
THE U.S. AND OTHER WORLD POWERS.
IN A SPEECH ON STATE-RUN TV
TODAY, HE CALLED HIS WIN "A
VICTORY FOR PEACE AND FRIENDSHIP
AND AGAINST VIOLENCE."
HIS RE-ELECTION ALSO HAS
IMPLICATIONS FOR THE WARS IN
SYRIA AND YEMEN.
JOINING ME BY SKYPE FROM TEHRAN
TO DISCUSS THIS IS JOURNALIST
REZA SAYAH.
REZA, PRESIDENT ROUHANI WON
DECISIVELY, AND THIS IS
ESPECIALLY INTERESTING BECAUSE
HIS BIGGEST CHALLENGER WAS A
VERY CONSERVATIVE CANDIDATE.
WHY DID HE WIN THIS WAY?
>> YEAH, I THINK FOR THE VOTERS
WHO CAME TO THE POLLS YESTERDAY,
THIS ELECTION PRESENTED TWO VERY
DIFFERENT CANDIDATES.
ON ONE HAND YOU HAD HASSAN
ROUHANI, THE MODERATE REFORMIST.
HE, OF COURSE, IS THE PRESIDENT
WHO IN 2015 SIGNED THE HISTORIC
NUCLEAR DEAL.
HIS APPROACH, HIS SALES WAS JUST
LET'S CONTINUE DOWN THIS PATH.
WE'RE ON THE RIGHT PATH, AND
EVEN THOUGH THE ECONOMY HASN'T
IMPROVED, WE'RE ON THE RIGHT
COURSE.
AND THEN YOU HAD HIS LEADING
CHALLENGER, IBRAHIM RAISI, THE
HARD-LINE CONSERVATIVE.
HE ESSENTIALLY ACCUSED
MR. ROUHANI AS FAILING TO
DELIVER ON THE PROMISE OF
BENEFITS OF THE NUCLEAR
AGREEMENT, OF BEING PART OF THE
FINANCIAL ELITE, THE WEALTHY
ELITE, IGNORING THE POOR.
AND HIS MESSAGE WAS IRAN NEEDS
TO LOOK BACK WITHIN ITS OWN
RESOURCES, ITS NATURAL
RESOURCES, ITS HUMAN RESOURCES,
ITS ISLAMIC REVOLUTIONARY VALUES
TO GET THE COUNTRY BACK GOING
AGAIN.
>> Stewart: WAS IT THE YOUNG
PEOPLE WHO MADE THE DIFFERENCE?
>> YEAH, I THINK THE YOUNG
PEOPLE WERE A FACTOR.
OF COURSE, IRAN'S POPULATION IS
VERY YOUNG.
ROUGHLY 70% UNDER THE AGE OF 35.
THE YOUNG POPULATION HERE WANTS
A MORE AFFORDABLE LIFE.
THEY WANT BETTER JOBS.
THEY WANT TO BE ABLE TO GET
MARRIED, BUY A CAR, BUY A HOME.
AND THEY SIMPLY HAVEN'T BEEN
ABLE TO DO THAT.
AND NOW IT'S UP TO MR. ROUHANI
IN THE NEXT FOUR YEARS TO
DELIVER SOME OF THOSE BENEFITS.
>> Stewart: FROM WHAT YOU CAN
TELL DID THE ELECTION OF DONALD
TRUMP AS PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED
STATES HAVE AN IMPACT ON THE
IRANIAN ELECTION?
>> I THINK IT DID.
LISTEN, THE ECONOMY WAS THE
NUMBER ONE ISSUE.
WHEN IT COMES TO THE ECONOMY,
RELATIONS WITH THE INTERNATIONAL
COMMUNITY, WITH THE WEST, WITH
THE U.S. IS GOING TO BE A
FACTOR.
AND I THINK WHAT'S MADE THINGS
VERY DIFFICULT FOR MR. ROUHANI
IS MR. TRUMP'S VERY TOUGH STANCE
AGAINST IRAN, ESSENTIALLY HE
CAME IN THREATENING TO TEAR UP
THE NUCLEAR DEAL.
NOW HE'S MADE MOVES THAT SUGGEST
HE'S GOING TO MAINTAIN THE
NUCLEAR DEAL.
>> Stewart: IRAN IS INVOLVED
IN TWO PROXY WARS, ONE IN YEMEN,
ONE IN SYRIA, SUPPORTING BASHAR
AL-ASSAD.
WILL ROUHANI STAY THE COURSE
THERE?
>> I THINK SO.
I THINK THESE ARE VERY IMPORTANT
ALLIES WITHIN THE REGION.
IRAN'S POSITION IS WHEN IT COMES
TO ALLIES THAT ARE IN THE
NEIGHBORHOOD, IN THE REGION,
IT'S THEIR DUTY TO PROTECT THEIR
INTERESTS, AND, OF COURSE, THEIR
INTERESTS INCLUDE SYRIA, IRAQ,
AND YEMEN.
>> Stewart: REPORTING FROM
TEHRAN, REZA SAYAH, THANK YOU SO
MUCH.
>> YOU'RE WELCOME.
>> Stewart: IT MAY SURPRISE YOU
THAT 1.2 BILLION PEOPLE-- 16% OF
THE EARTH'S POPULATION-- DO NOT
HAVE ACCESS TO ELECTRICITY,
ACCORDING TO THE INTERNATIONAL
ENERGY AGENCY.
THAT INCLUDES 300 MILLION PEOPLE
IN INDIA, 70% OF THE POPULATIONS
OF CAMBODIA, MYANMAR, NORTH
KOREA, AND HAITI, AND MUCH OF
SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA.
ONE COUNTRY THAT HAS MADE GREAT
STRIDES TOWARD UNIVERSAL ACCESS
TO ELECTRICITY IS THE EAST
AFRICAN NATION OF KENYA.
IN TONIGHT'S SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND SPECIAL
CORRESPONDENT CHRISTOPHER
LIVESAY REPORTS ON KENYA'S PLAN
TO BRING ELECTRICITY TO ITS
PEOPLE.
>> Reporter: SELINE AKINYI MUMBE
IS 49 YEARS OLD AND LIVED
WITHOUT ELECTRICITY FOR HER
FIRST 48 YEARS, UNTIL SHE
FINALLY GOT POWER TEN MONTHS
AGO.
SO THREE BUILDINGS HERE, ALL
CONNECTED TO ELECTRICITY?
>> YEAH.
>> Reporter: MUMBE LIVES IN
UNAMI, A VILLAGE 170 MILES
NORTHWEST OF NAIROBI.
>> (translated): I FELT LIKE I
WAS IN A DIFFERENT WORLD,
BECAUSE MY HOUSE WAS WELL LIT.
I KNEW I WAS NO LONGER GOING TO
SPEND MONEY ON OIL.
I WAS ALSO NOT GOING TO SPEND A
LOT OF TIME WALKING TO THE
MARKET TO CHARGE MY CELL PHONE.
>> Reporter: HER HOME WAS
RECENTLY HOOKED UP AS PART OF
THE "LAST MILE CONNECTIVITY
PROJECT," A GOVERNMENT PROGRAM
TO CONNECT 70% OF KENYANS TO THE
GRID BY THIS YEAR.
IT'S PART OF A LARGER GOAL TO
ACHIEVE UNIVERSAL ACCESS TO
ELECTRICITY BY 2020.
IT'S AN AMBITIOUS UNDERTAKING.
KENYA WOULD BECOME ONE OF THE
FIRST SUB-SAHARAN AFRICAN
NATIONS TO REACH THIS MILESTONE.
AND KENYA HAS MADE PROGRESS
RAPIDLY, GOING FROM 27% OF THE
POPULATION CONNECTED IN 2013, TO
56% IN 2016, ADDING MORE THAN
1.2 MILLION HOUSEHOLDS TO THE
GRID LAST YEAR ALONE.
THE QUEST BEGAN A DECADE AGO,
BY BUILDING TRANSFORMERS THAT
DISTRIBUTE ELECTRICITY.
FIRST PRIORITY WAS CONNECTING
HOSPITALS, MARKET CENTERS, AND
SCHOOLS TO THE GRID.
NOW, THE "LAST MILE" PROJECT IS
FOCUSING ON CONNECTING RURAL
HOUSEHOLDS.
MUMBE USES THE NEW ELECTRICITY
TO LIGHT UP HER HOUSE, IRON HER
FAMILY'S CLOTHES AND WARM WATER
WITH A HEATER THAT PLUGS INTO
THE WALL.
>> (translated): INITIALLY, I
USED TO IRON WITH A CHARCOAL
IRON BOX, AND BOIL WATER WITH
FIREWOOD.
HAVING ELECTRICITY MAKES WORK
EASIER.
EVEN IF I WANT TO WASH MY
CLOTHES AT NIGHT, ALL I HAVE TO
DO IS SWITCH ON THE LIGHT.
>> Reporter: SHE'S ALSO STARTED
A SMALL BUSINESS.
NEIGHBORS WITHOUT ELECTRICITY
PAY 10 CENTS TO CHARGE THEIR
CELL PHONES.
SUSANNA BERKOUWER IS A RESEARCH
ECONOMIST AT THE UNIVERSITY OF
CALIFORNIA, BERKELEY.
SHE'S PART OF A TEAM THAT
SURVEYED 4,000 HOUSEHOLDS IN
KENYA TO MEASURE THE IMPACT OF
ELECTRICITY ON PEOPLE'S LIVES--
EVERYTHING FROM HEALTH TO
EDUCATION TO EMPLOYMENT.
>> WE ASK A GENERAL QUESTION
ABOUT LIFE SATISFACTION.
JUST HOW SATISFIED ARE YOU WITH
YOUR LIFE?
AND ACTUALLY, WE SAW AN
IMPROVEMENT THERE.
IT FREES UP PEOPLE'S TIME, IT
ALLOWS THEM TO ENGAGE IN OTHER
ACTIVITIES IN THE HOME, OR JUST
TO TAKE THAT TIME TO RELAX AND
FEEL HAPPIER AND BE LESS
STRESSED.
>> Reporter: KENYAN ENERGY
MINISTER CHARLES KETER SAYS THE
SUCCESS OF THE "LAST MILE"
PROJECT CAN BE APPLIED
THROUGHOUT AFRICA, WHERE MORE
THAN 600 MILLION PEOPLE-- HALF
OF THE CONTINENT'S POPULATION--
STILL LIVE WITHOUT ELECTRICITY.
>> Reporter: TWO-THIRDS OF THE
COST OF KENYA'S ELECTRIFICATION
CAMPAIGN IS BEING FUNDED BY
LOANS FROM THE WORLD BANK AND
THE AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK.
BUT EVEN WITH SUCH WIDESPREAD
SUPPORT, THE COST OF CONNECTING
TO THE GRID AND WIRING A HOUSE
FALLS ON INDIVIDUAL KENYANS,
LIKE ROY ATIENO.
HE AND HIS WIFE, BELINDA, ARE
SUBSISTENCE FARMERS IN UNAMI.
THERE'S A NEW ELECTRICITY POLE
RIGHT OUTSIDE THEIR HOUSE, BUT
THEY CAN'T AFFORD THE COST OF
CONNECTING TO IT.
IS IT FRUSTRATING TO BE SO
CLOSE TO THE SOURCE OF THE
ELECTRICITY BUT NOT HAVE ACCESS?
>> I ALWAYS WISH, WHENEVER I
WALK OUT FROM MY HOUSE, I CHECK
AT THE POLE, AND THEN I WISH IT
IS ALREADY IN MY HOUSE.
IT IS FRUSTRATING!
>> Reporter: IN A 2015 U.C.-
BERKELEY STUDY, HALF OF RURAL
KENYAN HOUSEHOLDS SURVEYED LIVED
WITHIN 200 METERS OF A POWER
LINE, YET DIDN'T HAVE
ELECTRICITY.
>> THERE'S THIS WHOLE OTHER
CATEGORY OF "UNDERGRID," WHICH
ARE PEOPLE THAT ARE OFF-GRID, SO
THEY'RE NOT DIRECTLY CONNECTED
TO ELECTRICITY, BUT THEY'RE NOT
LIVING 100 MILES AWAY FROM THE
ELECTRICITY GRID.
THEY'RE ACTUALLY LIVING, IN MANY
CASES, TEN FEET AWAY FROM THEIR
NEAREST POLE.
>> Reporter: THE COST OF
CONNECTING TO THE GRID HAS
DROPPED FROM ABOUT $350 BEFORE
THE "LAST MILE" PROGRAM STARTED,
TO $150 TODAY, THANKS TO
SUBSIDIES FROM THE KENYAN
GOVERNMENT.
AND A POWER COMPANY LOAN PROGRAM
GIVES RESIDENTS THREE YEARS TO
PAY OFF THE INSTALLATION BILL.
STILL, $150 IS ABOUT FOUR TIMES
WHAT KENYANS IN THIS REGION EARN
IN A MONTH.
FOR THOSE WHO DO MANAGE TO GET
CONNECTED, IT'S ONLY WORTH THE
INVESTMENT IF THE POWER ACTUALLY
WORKS.
MANY KENYANS COMPLAIN OF
FREQUENT OUTAGES, LASTING FROM
MINUTES TO DAYS.
WHEN WE MET HAIR SALON OWNER
SUSAN ADHIAMBO KOPOT RIGHT
OUTSIDE UNAMI, THE SALON HAD
LOST POWER FOR MORE THAN AN
HOUR.
KOPOT AND HER EMPLOYEES WERE
LIMITED TO BRAIDING CUSTOMER'S
HAIR, BECAUSE THEY COULDN'T USE
A HAIR STRAIGHTENER OR BLOW
DRYER.
>> (translated): IT FEELS BAD,
BECAUSE YOU DECIDE TO SPEND YOUR
MONEY TO GET AN ELECTRICITY
CONNECTION, SO YOU CAN USE IT TO
RUN YOUR BUSINESS, BUT YOU END
UP EXPERIENCING BLACKOUTS.
IT'S VERY DISAPPOINTING.
>> Reporter: STANLEY MUTWIRI IS
THE HEAD OF INFRASTRUCTURE FOR
THE GOVERNMENT-CONTROLLED KENYA
POWER AND LIGHTING COMPANY,
KNOWN AS K.P.L.C.
MUTWIRI CONCEDES THAT SOME
UNPLANNED OUTAGES OCCUR DUE TO
ACTS OF NATURE, LIKE WIND OR
RAIN, BUT HE SAYS MOST ARE
PLANNED AND NECESSARY.
>> Reporter: K.P.L.C. IS
BUILDING NEW SUBSTATIONS TO
INCREASE THE CAPACITY OF THE
ELECTRICAL GRID.
WHEN THIS STATION GOES ONLINE
NEXT MONTH, THE TRANSFORMER WILL
BE ABLE TO SUPPLY THREE TIMES AS
MANY HOUSEHOLDS AS BEFORE.
KENYA ENERGY MINISTER CHARLES
KETER SAYS THE GOVERNMENT IS
ALSO PLANNING AHEAD AND
PRODUCING EXCESS POWER RIGHT
NOW, TO ENSURE IT CAN
ACCOMMODATE THE RISE IN FUTURE
DEMAND.
>> Reporter: RENEWABLE ENERGY
WILL BE CRUCIAL TO KENYA MEETING
THE SURGE IN DEMAND FOR
ELECTRICITY.
RIGHT NOW, THE COUNTRY GETS OVER
60% OF ITS ENERGY FROM RENEWABLE
SOURCES, SUCH AS GEOTHERMAL,
HYDRO, AND MORE RECENTLY, WIND.
THE TURKANA WIND FARM, IN
NORTHERN KENYA, IS DESIGNED TO
SUPPLY ONE-FIFTH OF THE NATION'S
ENERGY.
WHEN IT IS COMPLETED LATER THIS
YEAR, IT WILL BE THE LARGEST
WIND FARM IN AFRICA.
IN KENYA, RENEWABLE ENERGY IS
CHEAPER THAN FOSSIL FUELS.
>> Reporter: NIGHTTIME IS WHEN
THE PERSONAL IMPACT OF
ELECTRICITY IS MOST VISIBLE, AS
WELL AS ITS UNEVEN DISTRIBUTION.
AT ROY ATIENO'S HOUSE, WITH NO
ELECTRICITY, THE FAMILY EATS
DINNER BY THE LIGHT OF ONLY TWO
KEROSENE LAMPS.
BUT DOWN THE ROAD, SELINE
MUMBE'S ELECTRIFIED HOUSE HAS
BECOME A BEACON FOR SCHOOL
CHILDREN.
THEY COME FROM ALL OVER THE
VILLAGE TO STUDY AND DO
HOMEWORK.
BERYL JANE OTIENO IS 17.
>> (translated): BY AROUND
9:00 P.M. THE LIGHTS USED TO GET
DIM, AND I COULD NOT EVEN SEE
WHAT I WAS READING CLEARLY.
I USED TO STUDY FOR TWO TO THREE
HOURS, BUT NOWADAYS I ALWAYS
STUDY FOR FIVE HOURS.
>> Reporter: BUT SURPRISINGLY,
BERKOUWER SAYS, THE RESEARCH
SHOWS THAT PEOPLE'S LIVES
HAVEN'T SIGNIFICANTLY CHANGED
WITH THE FLIP OF A SWITCH.
AFTER ONE YEAR:
STUDENTS DID NOT PERFORM BETTER
IN ENGLISH OR MATH TESTS;
USING ELECTRICITY, WHICH LIKELY
REDUCES THE BURNING OF KEROSENE
OR WOOD, DIDN'T IMPROVE HEALTH;
AND, WHILE WOMEN WORKED MORE,
HOUSEHOLD INCOMES DIDN'T
IMPROVE.
>> SO WE'D LIKE TO GO BACK IN A
FEW YEARS AND SEE IF THE LONG-
TERM EFFECTS ARE DIFFERENT THAN
THE SHORT-TERM EFFECTS.
BUT MAYBE NOT.
MAYBE THESE THINGS JUST AREN'T
GOING TO IMPROVE BY AS MUCH AS
PEOPLE WERE EXPECTING.
>> Reporter: ONE REASON MAY BE
THAT NEWLY CONNECTED HOUSEHOLDS
DON'T HAVE THAT MANY WAYS TO USE
THE ELECTRICITY YET.
>> IF YOU PROVIDE SOMEBODY WITH
AN ELECTRICITY CONNECTION, BUT
THEY'RE NOT ABLE TO AFFORD THE
APPLIANCES THAT WOULD REALLY
ALLOW THEM TO USE THAT
ELECTRICITY CONNECTION, HOW MUCH
COULD IT REALLY EVEN BENEFIT
THEM?
AND IF WE CAN ANSWER THOSE TYPES
OF QUESTIONS, AND WE CAN COMPARE
THAT WITH SIMILAR RESEARCH THAT
LOOKS AT THE EFFECTS OF
IMPROVING YOUR EDUCATION OR THE
EFFECTS OF IMPROVING YOUR HEALTH
CARE, THEN A HOUSEHOLD, OR
INDEED A GOVERNMENT, CAN MAKE A
DECISION ABOUT WHICH OF THOSE IS
BETTER TO INVEST IN.
>> Reporter: BUT ENERGY MINISTER
CHARLES KETER SAYS PROVIDING
ELECTRICITY IS A HUMAN RIGHT AND
SHOULD BE A PRIORITY, EVEN FOR
POOR, RURAL HOUSEHOLDS.
SOME OF THEM HAVE HOMES WITH
ROOFS MADE OUT OF THATCH.
SOME OF THEM DON'T HAVE RELIABLE
ACCESS TO WATER OR EVEN FOOD.
IS ELECTRICITY REALLY THE
PRIORITY FOR THESE PEOPLE?
>> Stewart: AS THE CULT HIT
"TWIN PEAKS" RETURNS TO
TELEVISION, EXPLORE THE TOWNS
THAT SERVE AS A BACKDROP FOR THE
SHOW.
READ MORE AT
www.pbs.org/newshour.
>>THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND,
SATURDAY.
>> Stewart: TODAY IN NIGERIA, 82
SCHOOLGIRLS WHO HAD BEEN
KIDNAPPED BY THE INSURGENT GROUP
BOKO HARAM WERE FINALLY REUNITED
WITH THEIR FAMILIES.
THEY WERE FREED TWO WEEKS AGO BY
ISLAMIC MILITANTS, AFTER MORE
THAN THREE YEARS OF CAPTIVITY.
THEY WERE AMONG THE NEARLY
300 GIRLS WHO WERE KIDNAPPED
FROM THEIR BOARDING SCHOOL IN
CHIBOK, NIGERIA.
THE MILITANTS FORCED MANY OF THE
TEENAGE GIRLS TO MARRY THEM AND
HAVE CHILDREN.
THE 82 GIRLS WERE FREED IN
EXCHANGE FOR NIGERIA'S
GOVERNMENT RELEASING FIVE BOKO
HARAM COMMANDERS FROM PRISON.
NIGERIAN OFFICIALS SAY THEY'LL
MAKE FURTHER EXCHANGES TO WIN
THE RELEASE OF 113 GIRLS STILL
IN CAPTIVITY.
COPING WITH A SPIKE IN MEASLES,
ITALY HAS ORDERED ONE OF
EUROPE'S MOST WIDESPREAD
CHILDHOOD VACCINATION CAMPAIGNS.
THE ITALIAN CABINET YESTERDAY
APPROVED A NEW LAW MAKING
VACCINATION AGAINST MEASLES,
MUMPS, RUBELLA, MENINGITIS,
CHICKEN POX, AND SEVEN OTHER
INFECTIOUS DISEASES MANDATORY
FOR CHILDREN ATTENDING NURSERY
SCHOOL UP TO AGE 16.
PARENTS FACE FINES IF THEIR
CHILDREN AREN'T INOCULATED.
ITALY HAS SEEN 2,400 CASES OF
MEASLES THIS YEAR, TEN TIMES THE
NUMBER IN ALL OF 2015.
FOLLOWING A LENGTHY COURT
BATTLE, NEW ORLEANS HAS REMOVED
THE LAST OF FOUR DIVISIVE CIVIL
WAR-ERA STATUES IN THE CITY.
A CRANE LIFTED THE 20-FOOT
BRONZE STATUE OF CONFEDERATE
ARMY GENERAL ROBERT E. LEE FROM
ITS 60-FOOT TALL PEDESTAL LAST
NIGHT.
THE CITY COUNCIL HAD VOTED BACK
IN 2015 TO REMOVE THE STATUES,
BECAUSE THEY WERE SYMBOLS OF
SLAVERY AND WHITE SUPREMACY.
AND, THE NATIONAL HIGHWAY
TRAFFIC SAFETY ADMINISTRATION IS
INVESTIGATING THE RECALL BY
HYUNDAI AND ITS AFFILIATE KIA
MOTORS OF 1.7 MILLION VEHICLES
FOR ENGINE DEFECTS.
REGULATORY FILINGS PUBLISHED
TODAY SHOW N.H.T.S.A. IS
INVESTIGATING WHETHER THE 2015
RECALL WAS TOO SLOW AND COVERED
TOO FEW VEHICLES.
HYUNDAI SAID IT WOULD COOPERATE
WITH INVESTIGATORS.
>> Stewart: FINALLY, OFFICIALS
IN NORWAY ARE REPAIRING DAMAGE
BROUGHT ABOUT BY CLIMATE CHANGE
TO THE SO-CALLED "DOOMSDAY" SEED
VAULT BURIED INSIDE AN ARCTIC
MOUNTAIN.
THE VAULT, BUILT TEN YEARS AGO
SOME 600 MILES FROM THE NORTH
POLE, STORES MILLIONS OF SEEDS
FOR THOUSANDS OF CROPS, AS A
SAFEGUARD AGAINST NATURAL
DISASTERS OR EVEN NUCLEAR WAR.
BUT UNUSUALLY HIGH TEMPERATURES
LAST YEAR MELTED THE MOUNTAIN'S
PERMAFROST, AND WATER LEAKED
INTO THE VAULT.
THE SEEDS THEMSELVES WERE NOT
DAMAGED.
TOMORROW ON THE BROADCAST,
IMPROVING SEX ED TO LOWER TEEN
PREGNANCY RATES.
THAT'S ALL FOR THIS EDITION
OF PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
THANKS FOR WATCHING.
I'M ALISON STEWART.
GOOD NIGHT.